Larry D. Pyeatt
Curriculum Vitae
2330 56th
Lubbock, Texas 79412
(806) 791--3696
larry.pyeatt@ttu.edu
Education Doctor of Philosophy in Computer Science
Colorado State University, 1999.
Dissertation: Integration of Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes and Rein­
forcement Learning for Simulated Robot Navigation
Committee: Adele Howe (Chair), Charles Anderson, Darrell Whitley, Wade Troxell
Master of Science in Computer Science
Texas Tech University, 1991.
Thesis: Application of the Neural Ring Pattern Classifier to Speech Recognition
Committee: W. J. Bryan Oldham (Chair), Thomas M. English, Donald Gustafson
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science
Texas Tech University, 1988.
Minor in Psychology, additional course work in Mathematics and Electrical Engineering.
Research
Interests
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes, Reinforcement Learning, Function Ap­
proximation, Robotics and Agent Architectures, Real­time and Embedded Systems
Honors and
Awards
Academic
Upsilon Pi Epsilon (computer science honor society), Texas Tech, 1989
Third Place Team, ACM International Programming Competition, Louisville, KY, 1989
President's List, Texas Tech, Spring 1986
Dean's List, Texas Tech, Spring 1986
Engineering Academic Scholarship, Texas Tech, 1983
Texaco
Patent Letter, August 30, 1995
Patent Application Award, July 19, 1993
Exploration & Production Tech. Dept. Award for Outstanding Supplier, February 23,
1993
Individual Outstanding Contribution (IOC) Award for Innovation, August 5, 1992
Languages English, Russian
Professional
Experience
Lecturer/Doctoral Candidate 1/98--present. Taught courses in digital design and as­
sembly language programming, operating systems, and programming languages.
Graduate Research Assistant/Doctoral Candidate Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, 9/93--present. Explored several areas of AI before focusing on reinforcement
learning and partially observable Markov decision processes in the context of robotics for
my dissertation.

Larry D. Pyeatt
Curriculum Vitae 2
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (9/97--present) Implemented all
known POMDP exact solution algorithms. Improved some algorithms to reduce so­
lution time and allow solution of larger problems than were previously possible. Ex­
tended algorithms and code to allow parallel execution on several Unix machines.
Robotics (9/97--present) Developed a three­level control architecture for the Khep­
era robot using a symbolic planner at the highest level, POMDP planning at the middle
level, reinforcement learning at the low level. Implemented middle and low levels and
showed that a robot could learn low level extended actions as necessary to complete
its task and could modify its low level actions to adapt to sensor and effector failures.
Neural Networks and Reinforcement Learning (9/96--9/97) Experimented with re­
inforcement learning using neural networks for function approximation. Ran experi­
ments using a Pente simulator, pole­balancing simulator and the Robot Auto Rac­
ing Simulator (RARS). Added a high­level controller to the RARS system to allow
switching between learned behaviors. Invented a new function approximation tech­
nique based on decision trees. Showed that it was superior to the neural network
approach.
Structure in Discrete Event Sequences (9/95--9/97) Developed method to detect
dependencies in program execution traces and construct a Semi­Markov model of the
underlying system behavior. Worked with Adele Howe, Eric Dahlman and Gabriel
Somlo to write CLASPWeb which allows anyone with a web browser to use the code.
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) (5/95--8/95) Developed method to nor­
malize lighting and remove shadows from aerial and satellite terrain photographs. The
software worked by texture mapping the photograph onto the corresponding USGS el­
evation data, calculating the position of the sun at the time the photograph was taken,
and applying an inverse lighting calculation. The normalized photograph could then
be texture mapped onto the USGS elevation data and a forward lighting model could
be applied to show lighting conditions at any time of day or year.
Genetic Algorithms (9/93--5/95) Developed system to track the ranking of hyper­
planes during genetic search; compared dynamic ranking with static ranking. Wrote
code to evolve neural network weights. Compared the results with Frederic Gruau's
Cellular Encoding method.
Senior Information Systems Programmer Texaco Inc., Houston, Texas, 9/91--9/93.
Evaluation and application of Artificial Intelligence and advanced problem solving tech­
niques for Texaco business needs. Delivered applications on PC, Unix, and IBM main­
frame platforms. Performed system administration for Unix environment. Used a wide
variety of systems, languages, tools and techniques. Two major projects were:
SpectraMan (9/92--9/94) Ultraviolet Fluorescence Spectra Manager. The software
was used to automate the process of identifying and characterizing unknown hydro­
carbon mixtures. It kept a database of thousands of known 3D ultraviolet fluorescence
spectra. The chemist could use a neural network, embedded in the software, to match

Larry D. Pyeatt
Curriculum Vitae 3
an unknown sample to every other sample in the database. The neural net selected a
user­specified number of similar spectra that the chemist could then view and print,
along with additional information in the database, in order to make a final determina­
tion about the characteristics of the unknown sample. This software greatly reduced
the time required to perform an analysis and enabled a large increase in the productiv­
ity of the chemists. I wrote the prototype in assembly and C on a PC running DOS.
The prototype showed what was possible, but was deemed too slow and could only
allow viewing of one spectrum at a time. The final version of the software was written
in C using the X Window System, Motif, OpenGL, and an SQL database server. It was
developed on Sun and delivered on SGI. The lead chemist, Dr. Marilyn Reyes, and I
were awarded United States Patent 5424959 for this software.
Reservoir Modeling Expert System (11/9--11/92) The reservoir management team
at Texaco gathers production data on every reservoir that Texaco owns. Once they
have sufficient data on a particular reservoir, they try to fit the data to one of several
mathematical models. If they select the correct model, they can accurately predict
the production of the reservoir and select an appropriate production schedule. There
were very few people experienced in selecting the model, and several experts had
recently retired or were preparing to retire. The team leader was faced with having an
inexperienced staff and no one to train them. We built an expert system for selecting
the reservoir model, allowing the team to continue its work with a reduced and less
experienced staff.
Graduate Research Assistant Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, 8/88--9/91. Re­
search in neural networks and speech recognition.
Speech Recognition Developed speaker independent speech recognition system for
digits. The speech recognition system followed the now standard model of signal pre­
processing, fast Fourier transform, Mel scale extraction, segmentation using a hidden
Markov model, and recognition. The recognition section used a neural ring pattern
classifier.
Embedded Control Evaluated currently available hardware and operating systems
for embedded distributed control of silicon wafer processing machinery. Made rec­
ommendation to the company that funded the study. Taught Introduction to Computer
Science course using Pascal. Taught digital electronics lab. Supervised construction
of circuits by the students. Assisted students in the implementation of their circuit
designs.
Self­Employed 8/88--7/89. Developed accounting and subscriber list software for small
newspapers. Wrote code in C and Pascal on IBM PC and Apple Macintosh systems.
Embedded Control Systems Design Engineer Applied Hydraulics, Lubbock, Texas,
1/87--7/88. Designed microprocessor and sequential logic based systems for industrial
control and data acquisition. Designed circuit boards for the systems. Supervised tech­
nical staff who were responsible for constructing the hardware designs. Designed and
wrote software for the new systems in assembly and C. Was responsible for all stages of
the process: assessing customer needs, creating design specifications, implementing the
systems, installing at the customer's site, and providing post­delivery technical assistance.

Larry D. Pyeatt
Curriculum Vitae 4
Journal
Articles
Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Evaluating robustness in a two layer simulated robot
architecture. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 1999. In
Review.
Adele E. Howe, Gabriel Somlo, and Larry Pyeatt. Characterizing structure in discrete
event sequences. Submitted to Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, July­December
1998.
Conference
Papers
Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. A parallel algorithm for POMDP solution. In
Proceedings of the Fifth European Conference on Planning (ECP­99), Durham, United
Kingdom, September 1999.
Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Decision tree function approximation for reinforce­
ment learning. 1999. Submitted to International Conference on Machine Learning.
Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Integrating POMDP and reinforcement learning for a
two layer simulated robot architecture. In Third International Conference on Autonomous
Agents, Seattle, Washington, May 1999.
Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Learning to race: Experiments with a simulated race
car. In Diane J. Cook, editor, Proceedings of the Eleventh International Florida Artificial
Intelligence Research Symposium Conference, pages 357--361, Sanibel Island, FL, May
1998. Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Symposium, AAAI Press.
Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Reinforcement learning for coordinated reactive
control. In Fourth World Congress on Expert Systems, March 1998.
Adele E. Howe and Larry D. Pyeatt. Constructing transition models of AI planner behav­
ior. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Knowledge Based Systems Engineering Conference,
September 1996.
Fr’ ed’ eric Gruau, Darrell Whitley, and Larry Pyeatt. A comparison between cellular en­
coding and direct encoding for genetic neural networks. In Proceedings of the Sixth
International Conference on Genetic Programming. Stanford University Press, July 1996.
Darrell Whitley, Fr’ ed’ eric Gruau, and Larry Pyeatt. Cellular encoding applied to neuro­
control. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Genetic Algorithms,
July 1995.
Darrell Whitley, Keith Mathias, and Larry Pyeatt. Hyperplane ranking and implicit paral­
lelism in simple genetic algorithms. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Genetic Algorithms, July 1995.
Larry D. Pyeatt and W. J. Bryan Oldham. Application of the neural ring pattern classifier
to speech recognition. In Proceedings of the Southeastern Region ACM Conference, pages
385--387. ACM, 1991.
PhD
Dissertation
Larry D. Pyeatt. Integration of Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes and
Reinforcement Learning for Simulated Robot Navigation. PhD dissertation, Colorado
State University, Computer Science Department, July 1999.

Larry D. Pyeatt
Curriculum Vitae 5
Masters
Thesis
Larry D. Pyeatt. Application of the neural ring pattern classifier to speech recognition.
M.S. Thesis, Texas Tech University, May 1991.
Unrefereed
Symposia &
Workshops
Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Testing generalization in learned simulated robot
behaviors. In Henry Hexmoore, editor, Workshop on Autonomy Control Software, Seattle,
Washington, May 1999. Third International Conference on Autonomous Agents.
Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Integrating POMDP and reinforcement learning for a
two layer simulated robot architecture. In Michael Littman and Tony Cassandra, editors,
AAAI 1998 Fall Symposium Series -- Planning with Partially Observable Markov Deci­
sion Processes: Working Notes, pages 371--388, Orlando, Florida, October 1998. AAAI.
Revised version appeared in Third International Conference on Autonomous Agents.
Unrefereed
Technical
Reports
Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Decision tree function approximation in reinforce­
ment learning. Tech Report TR CS­98­112, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
Colorado, October 1998.
Mark R. Stevens, Larry D. Pyeatt, David J. Houlton, and Michael E. Goss. Locating
shadows in aerial photographs using imprecise elevation data. Technical Report TR
CS­95­105, Colorado State University, Department of Computer Science, Fort Collins,
Colorado, 1995.
Patent Marilyn V. Reyes and Larry D. Pyeatt. Interpretation of fluorescence fingerprints of
crude oils and other hydrocarbon mixtures using neural networks. United States Patent
5424959, property of Texaco Inc., 1995.
Professional
Presentations
Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. A parallel algorithm for POMDP solution. Fifth Eu­
ropean Conference on Planning (ECP­99), September 1999. Durham, United Kingdom.
Testing generalization in learned simulated robot behaviors. Third International Con­
ference on Autonomous Agents: Workshop on Autonomy Control Software, May 1999.
Seattle, Washington.
Integrating POMDP and reinforcement learning for a two layer simulated robot archi­
tecture. Third International Conference on Autonomous Agents, May 1999. Seattle,
Washington.
Automatic learning of extended actions in a multi­level robot architecture: Preliminary
results. AAAI Fall Symposium on Planning with Partially Observable Markov Decision
Processes, October 1998. Orlando, Florida.
Learning to race: Experiments with a simulated race car. 11th International Florida Arti­
ficial Intelligence Research Symposium Conference, July 1998. Sanibel Island, Florida.
Reinforcement learning for coordinated reactive control. Fourth World Congress on Ex­
pert Systems, March 1998. Mexico City, Mexico.

Larry D. Pyeatt
Curriculum Vitae 6
Learning new behaviors. NSF Sponsored Workshop on Intelligent Agents, July 1997.
Porto Alegre, Brazil.
A comparison between cellular encoding and direct encoding for genetic neural networks.
Genetic Programming Conference, July 1996. Stanford University.
Application of the neural ring pattern classifier to speech recognition. Southeastern Re­
gion ACM Conference, 1991. Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama.
Professional
Service
Reviewer
1998 American Journal of Mathematical and Management Sciences
1999 IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
1999 Journal of Experimintal and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence
References Adele E. Howe, Department of Computer Science, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, CO 80523. Telephone: (970)491--7589 Email: howe@cs.colostate.edu
Charles W. Anderson, Department of Computer Science, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, CO 80523. Telephone: (970)491--7491 Email: anderson@cs.colostate.edu
Darrell Whitley, Department of Computer Science, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, CO 80523. Telephone: (970)491--5373 Email: whitley@cs.colostate.edu
William M. Marcy, Interim Dean of Engineering, Texas Tech University, Box 43103,
Lubbock, TX 79409­3103. Telephone: (806)742--3451 Email: cswmm@cs.coe.ttu.edu
W. J. Bryan Oldham, Department of Computer Science, Texas Tech University, Box
43103, Lubbock, TX 79409. Telephone: (806)742--3527 Email: oldham@cs.coe.ttu.edu
Pat DeLaune, Texaco Exploration and Production Technology Department. Telephone:
(713)954­6030

