Biographical Sketch
Larry D. Pyeatt
Computer Science Department
Texas Tech University
P.O. Box 43104
Lubbock, TX 79409
larry.pyeatt@ttu.edu
Education 

Doctor of Philosophy in Computer Science
Colorado State University, 1999.
Dissertation: Integration of Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes and Reinforcement Learning for Simulated Robot Navigation
Committee: Adele Howe (Advisor), Charles Anderson, Darrell Whitley, Wade Troxell

Master of Science in Computer Science
Texas Tech University, 1991.
Thesis: Application of the Neural Ring Pattern Classifier to Speech Recognition
Committee: W. J. Bryan Oldham (Advisor), Thomas M. English, Donald Gustafson
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science
Texas Tech University, 1988.

Research Interests

Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes, Reinforcement Learning, Function Approximation, Robotics and Agent Architectures, Real­time and Embedded Systems

Professional Experience

Assistant Professor Texas Tech University, Lubbock, 9/99--present.

Graduate Research Assistant/Doctoral Candidate Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, 9/93--9/99.

Senior Information Systems Programmer Texaco Inc., Houston, Texas, 9/91--9/93.

Graduate Research Assistant Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, 8/88--9/91.

Embedded Control Systems Design Engineer Applied Hydraulics, Lubbock, Texas,
1/87--7/88.

Selected Publications

Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Evaluating robustness in a two layer
simulated robot architecture. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence: Special Issue on Autonomy Control Software, 2000.

Larry D. Pyeatt. Integration of Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
and Reinforcement Learning for Simulated Robot Navigation. PhD dissertation,
Colorado State University, Computer Science Department, July 1999.

Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. A parallel algorithm for POMDP solution. In
Proceedings of the Fifth European Conference on Planning (ECP­99), Durham,
United Kingdom, September 1999.

Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Integrating POMDP and reinforcement
learning for a two layer simulated robot architecture. In Third International
Conference on Autonomous Agents, Seattle, Washington, May 1999.

Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Learning to race: Experiments with a
simulated race car. In Diane J. Cook, editor, Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Symposium Conference,
pages 357--361, Sanibel Island, FL, May 1998. Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Symposium, AAAI Press.

Larry D. Pyeatt and Adele E. Howe. Reinforcement learning for coordinated
reactive control. In Fourth World Congress on Expert Systems, March 1998.

Adele E. Howe and Larry D. Pyeatt. Constructing transition models of AI
planner behavior. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Knowledge Based Systems
Engineering Conference, September 1996.

Frederic Gruau, Darrell Whitley, and Larry Pyeatt. A comparison between
cellular encoding and direct encoding for genetic neural networks. In
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Genetic
Programming. Stanford University Press, July 1996. 

Darrell Whitley, Frederic Gruau, and Larry Pyeatt. Cellular encoding applied
to neuro-control. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on
Genetic Algorithms, July 1995.

Marilyn V. Reyes and Larry D. Pyeatt. Interpretation of fluorescence
fingerprints of crude oils and other hydrocarbon mixtures using neural
networks. United States Patent 5424959, property of Texaco Inc., 1995.

Synergistic Activities

Curriculum Development
Co­PI on NSF CRCD grant entitled ``Machine Learning: a Multidisciplinary
Computer Engineering Graduate Program.'' The grant supports the creation of an
interdisciplinary program in artificial intelligence and includes the
development of new courses and textbooks in Markov decision processes and reinforcement learning.

Reviewer
1998 American Journal of Mathematical and Management Sciences
1999 IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
1999 Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence

Program Committee
Workshop on Teams with Adjustable Autonomy at Autonomous Agents 2000,
Barcelona, Spain, June 3/4, 2000
